docs/source/installation.rst, before:

.. role:: bash(code)
   :language: bash

Installation
================

Libraries
---------------

To compile the h-NUMO model, one needs the following modules

| :bash:`gcc version 8 and above`
| :bash:`openmpi`
| :bash:`make`
| :bash:`lapack`
| :bash:`netcdf`

Installation instructions
--------------------------------

h-NUMO will need the :bash:`mpi90` command in order to compile. It is up to the user to ensure that these packages exist on his computing platform.

1. Clone the repository to a local directory

   * ``git clone git@github.com:ygahounzo/h-NUMO.git``

2. Go to the base directory of the repository

   * cd ``h-NUMO``

2. Install and compile h-NUMO

   Inside the ``h-NUMO`` directory type the following command to compile p4est and h-NUMO

   ``make hnumo``



   .. warning::

      Sometimes simple make does not work, and you need to compile p4est 

      * Compile p4est by typing from ``h-NUMO`` root directory
         ``make p4est/local/lib/libp4est.a``

      * Export path to the p4est library
         To make sure this is exported every time you log-in, put the following line to :bash:`~/.bash_profile` file:

         ``export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$PATH:<path_to_h-NUMO>/p4est/local/lib``

         where <path_to_h-NUMO> is the location where you have installed h-NUMO

         Just in case type source ~./bash_profile, and it is not a bad idea to include this source command in your run scripts

      * Compile NUMO by going to its directory and typing:
         ``make hnumo`` (check the config.user if you want to compile on a specific platforms)


Once you successfully make h-NUMO, additional directories will result. These are:


         *  :bash:`bin`

         *  :bash:`depend.mk`

         *  :bash:`include`

Commit message:

Update on Homebrew flag compilation and documentation with the list of packages needed to compile h-NUMO.

docs/source/installation.rst, after:

.. role:: bash(code)
   :language: bash

Installation
================

Libraries
---------------

To compile the h-NUMO model, one needs the following packages installed on the system:

| :bash:`gcc version 8 and above`
| :bash:`openmpi`
| :bash:`make`
| :bash:`netcdf`

Installation instructions
--------------------------------

h-NUMO will need the :bash:`mpi90` command in order to compile. It is up to the user to ensure that these packages exist on their computing platform.

1. Clone the repository to a local directory

   * ``git clone git@github.com:ygahounzo/h-NUMO.git``

2. Go to the base directory of the repository

   * cd ``h-NUMO``

2. Install and compile h-NUMO:
   
   2.1. On HPC systems: Ensure that the required libraries are loaded (gcc, openmpi, netcdf).

      At the root of the ``h-NUMO`` directory type the following command to compile p4est and h-NUMO

      ``make hnumo``

      One may need to edit the ``config.user`` file to specify the correct compilers paths and flags for their platform

   2.2. On MacOS: use Homebrew to install the required libraries:

      * Install Homebrew if you haven't already: https://brew.sh/
      * Install dependencies:
        ``brew install gcc open-mpi netcdf``

      Then at the root of the ``h-NUMO`` directory type the following command to compile p4est and h-NUMO

      ``make hnumo-brew``

   .. warning::

      Sometimes simple make does not work, and you need to compile p4est 

      * Compile p4est by typing from ``h-NUMO`` root directory
         ``make p4est/local/lib/libp4est.a``

      * Export path to the p4est library
         To make sure this is exported every time you log-in, put the following line to :bash:`~/.bash_profile` file:

         ``export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$PATH:<path_to_h-NUMO>/p4est/local/lib``

         where <path_to_h-NUMO> is the location where you have installed h-NUMO

         Just in case type source ~./bash_profile, and it is not a bad idea to include this source command in your run scripts

      * Compile NUMO by going to its directory and typing:
         ``make hnumo`` (check the config.user if you want to compile on a specific platforms)


Once you successfully make h-NUMO, additional directories will result. These are:


         *  :bash:`bin`

         *  :bash:`depend.mk`

         *  :bash:`include`
